first tried to split data acquisition and feature engineering. then combined them. then realized that for future purposes of data changes and buildout, having it as a separate stage is better. 

Research questions:
-do any measures scoring "better" predict overall hospital rating?--maybe just do any measures predict overall hospital rating?
-do any measures scoring "better" predict overall birth friendly designation?
--Stronger version:
    1. Can I predict overall hospital rating?
    2. Which features matter most in prediction? 
    3. Do hospital features improve prediction of the overall hospital rating over using the outcome measures alone?
    Drop birth-friendly because of missingness--can look at associations of birth friendly to hospital ratings and account for state and hospital type for example.

EDA to do:
DONE-descriptive stats including missingness (as some of the measures include almost 50% missingness, including hospital rating target--almost 800 are the 4-5 hospital types that were not rated--find out why these werent rated)
DONE -rating by hospital type boxplot (noted that only 3 hospital types have ratings-- acute care, acute VA, and critical care)
DONE **birthing friendly target not necessarily true because there may be missingness that is housed in the data--need to check this prior to converting it--do in report for stage 1
DONE -THe footnotes can be ignored for now, plot distributions for measures of interest and targets.
DONE-distributions
DONE-crosstab/correlations


Other considerations:
-when splitting data, need to consider missingness--drop NA from there. Consider log transform if neeeded but planning to use trees so probably not important to transform
-generate reports from data_acq and preprocessing stages (e.g., data_acq can report out what files were combined, the initial sizes, then overall final size, preprocessing can report out missingness, averages, etc.)
-Tableau geo mapping?
-add another dataset (e.g. census/population data)


Need to think more about visualizations for EDA
-DONE distributions of facility measures for each category
-DONE bar graph of overall measure counts
-DONE distributions of better measures for each category
-explore what is going on with pt exp measures (8 only?, yes, this is true. Wonder if there is some rule about this?)

**NEED TO FIX birthing criteria issue--
DONE 1 - may not be representative (missing != False necessarily)


Still need to do:
Need to add files to .dvcignore (check ekstrand's template)
May need to drop NA from train data for hospital type
Come back to model stacking for RFR and XGBR models. Regression is better than classification for this case due to the discrete rating data having meaning; however, results might be boosted with model tuning and also model stacking. Need to figure out how to stack models in the pipeline.
For Later:
OOF means out-of-fold predictions.

It comes up in stacking because the stacking model should learn from base-model predictions that were made on data the base model did not train on.

That is the whole point.

The problem OOF solves

Suppose you have training data and two base models:

RF
XGB

If you do this:

train RF on all training rows
predict on those same training rows
train the stacker on those predictions

that is bad.

Why? Because RF is predicting rows it already saw during training, so those predictions are unrealistically good. The stacker then learns from over-optimistic inputs and tends to overfit.

OOF fixes that.

What “fold” means

In cross-validation, you split the training set into chunks called folds.

Example with 5 folds:

fold 1
fold 2
fold 3
fold 4
fold 5

For each round:

train on 4 folds
predict on the 1 held-out fold

That held-out fold is “out of fold” for that model fit.

How OOF predictions are created

Say you have training rows 1–100 and use 5-fold CV.

Round 1
train on folds 2, 3, 4, 5
predict on fold 1
Round 2
train on folds 1, 3, 4, 5
predict on fold 2
Round 3
train on folds 1, 2, 4, 5
predict on fold 3

and so on.

At the end:

every training row gets a prediction
but that prediction came from a model that did not train on that row

Those are the OOF predictions.

Why that matters for stacking

The stacker uses base-model predictions as features.

So instead of training the stacker on “cheating” predictions from base models that saw the row already, you train it on OOF predictions, which are much closer to what happens on truly unseen data.

Example training table for the stacker:

rf_oof_pred   xgb_oof_pred   true_rating
3.1           3.4            4
2.2           2.0            2
4.0           4.5            5
...

The stacker learns from these.

Relation to train/test split

Think of it as two levels of splitting.

Outer split

This is your normal split:

train set
test set

The test set stays untouched until final evaluation.

Inner split

Inside the train set only, you do cross-validation folds to create OOF predictions.

So the flow is:

split full data into train and test
inside train, create OOF predictions for RF and XGB using CV folds
train the stacker on those OOF predictions
train RF and XGB again on the full training set
get RF and XGB predictions on the test set
feed those test predictions into the trained stacker
evaluate stacked predictions on the test set

That is the clean stacking workflow.

Why not use test data for stacker training

Because then you leak evaluation data into training.

The test set should only answer:

“How good is the final stacked model on unseen data?”

It should not help train base models or the meta-model.

Concrete example

Suppose you have 1,000 rows.

Step 1: outer split
800 train
200 test
Step 2: OOF on the 800 train rows

Using 5 folds:

each fold has about 160 rows
for each fold, train on about 640 rows
predict on the held-out 160

Now every one of the 800 training rows gets:

RF OOF prediction
XGB OOF prediction
Step 3: train stacker

Train stacker on:

800 rows:
[rf_oof_pred, xgb_oof_pred] -> true target
Step 4: final base-model test predictions

Retrain RF and XGB on all 800 training rows.
Then predict on the 200 test rows.

Now for the test rows you have:

rf_test_pred   xgb_test_pred

Feed those into the stacker to get final stacked predictions.

Why this is efficient in a pipeline

This suggests a good division of artifacts:

base model OOF predictions for train
base model predictions for test
fitted stacker model
final stacked predictions

That way you do not repeat work unnecessarily.

Intuition

OOF predictions are like “practice exam scores from graders who had not seen the answer key for that student.”

In-sample train predictions are like “scores from a grader who already memorized that student’s paper.”

The second one looks better than reality and is not trustworthy for training the stacker.

For your project

Because your target is ordinal 1–5, the clean version is probably:

base models: regression RF and regression XGB
OOF predictions from both on train
stacker: simple regressor like Ridge
final stacked prediction rounded/clipped to 1–5 for reporting
Minimal summary
OOF = predictions for a training row made by a model that did not train on that row
it is created with cross-validation inside the training set
it prevents leakage when training the stacking model
the test set remains untouched until the very end

A compact pseudo-flow:

split data into train, test

for each base model:
    make oof predictions on train using cv
    fit model on full train
    make predictions on test

train stacker on train_oof_predictions
predict test_final using base_model_test_predictions
evaluate on test